Blog - Why I've had more fun as a product engineer than any other role in tech (#5178)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/why-product-engineering-is-so-fun.md

sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - raquel-m-smith
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Explainers
---

In my career so far (admittedly not _that_ long, though no one mistakes me for a college kid any longer, womp womp) I've done a little bit of a _lot_ of different things. In some rough order I've moderated forums, led customer success, created marketing plans and SEO strategies, built websites and apps, led product at a seed-to-series-A co, coded + ran my own startup, and more. I'm currently a product engineer here at PostHog working on the Growth Team. 

Maybe it's just me, but I've had more fun as a product engineer than in _any_ other role, hands down. I'll tell you why.

## Why optimize for fun?

But first... why does optimizing for fun matter? 

For me, it's simple. Having fun while working is highly correlated with my job satisfaction. It sounds obvious, but I've seen many people sacrifice the fun they have for some _thing_ that gives them more money, status, or just the feeling of progressing up the ladder, even if they have no idea where that ladder leads.

> When we find activities we enjoy, our brains want us to do them again and again – see this piece on the [neuroscience of fun](https://hub.jhu.edu/magazine/2016/summer/neuroscience-of-fun/) for why. This has a couple interesting ramifications in a work context:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we find activities we enjoy, our brains want us to do them again and again. This has a couple interesting ramifications in a work context:
```

---

> date: 2022-02-06

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-01-31
```

> title: Why I've had more fun as a product engineer than any other role in tech

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: I've had more fun as a product engineer than any other role in tech
```

I really like the tone of this headline, but I'm trying to think of a way to make it easier to parse. Maybe it doesn't matter? Interested in your input here as well @ivanagas + @charlescook-ph.

Author: I know "Why" posts can be very click-y but I'm fine without it, you all make the call 👍

Reviewer 2: The intention is fine, I think it is just too long. Should probably be some combination of "product engineer", "fun/best/favorite", and "tech role". Some ideas: 
- Why being a product engineer is the best role in tech
- Why product engineer is my favorite tech role
- I'm a product engineer, here's why it's the best
- Product engineer is the most fun role in tech

rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - raquel-m-smith
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Explainers
---

In my career so far (admittedly not _that_ long, though no one mistakes me for a college kid any longer, womp womp) I've done a little bit of a _lot_ of different things. In some rough order I've moderated forums, led customer success, created marketing plans and SEO strategies, built websites and apps, led product at a seed-to-series-A co, coded + ran my own startup, and more. I'm currently a product engineer here at PostHog working on the Growth Team. 

Maybe it's just me, but I've had more fun as a product engineer than in _any_ other role, hands down. I'll tell you why.

> ## Optimizing for fun

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why optimize for fun?
```

> But first - why does it matter how much fun I'm having? For me, it's simple. I've happily realized that the amount of fun I have in my work is highly correlated with my job satisfaction. It sounds obvious - if you're not having fun, would you be satisfied with your job? But I've seen a lot of people sacrifice the fun they have for some _thing_ that gives them more money, status, or even just more of a feeling that they've climbed up the next rung of the ladder despite the fact that they aren't quite sure where the ladder is going.

Author: ```suggestion
But first... why does optimizing for fun matter? 

For me, it's simple. Having fun while working is highly correlated with my job satisfaction. It sounds obvious, but I've seen many people sacrifice the fun they have for some _thing_ that gives them more money, status, or just the feeling of progressing up the ladder, even if they have no idea where that ladder leads.
```

> The problem is that without the fun in the job you lose your daily drive to do the work. When we do things that we experience as being "fun" our neurons are releasing dopamine and activating the parts of the brain that scientists call pleasure centers [[1]](https://hub.jhu.edu/magazine/2016/summer/neuroscience-of-fun/). When we find activities that activate these pleasure centers, our brains want us to do them again and again. In a work context, this has a couple interesting ramifications:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we find activities we enjoy, our brains want us to do them again and again – see this piece on the [neuroscience of fun](https://hub.jhu.edu/magazine/2016/summer/neuroscience-of-fun/) for why.  This has a couple interesting ramifications in a work context:
```

1) If we're having fun (and releasing dopamine) while doing our work, we'll not only be okay with doing our work on the daily, we will actively look forward to and pursue it.
2) When we do things again and again, we tend to get better at them, and thus better at our jobs.

> And when you put these two things together, you'll likely find that optimizing for fun in your work results in you wanting to work more and being better at the work you do, which _should_ (hopefully, theoretically) result in the salary increases and promotions that you've been dreaming about all along.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And when you put these two things together, you'll likely find that optimizing for fun in your work results in you wanting to work more and being better at it. This _should_ (hopefully, theoretically) result in the salary increases and promotions that you've been dreaming about all along.
```

3. The ability to make _important_ decisions - 5/5
    - This is simply what PMs are there for. Take the given context, decide what to do with it.

Adding this up we get a score of 12/15. Not bad!

### How fun is Software Engineering? 

1. Challenging problems to solve - 5/5
    - There is nothing like the dopamine rush you get when you've been working through a problem and you finally get it to work. As a software engineer, this happens usually multiple times per day. 
2. Support from other highly motivated colleagues - 5/5
    - Software engineers typically work on a team with at least one other engineer. This team aspect is critical to feeling supported.
3. The ability to make _important_ decisions - 3/5 (or even 2/5)
    - While engineers can make important decisions about how something is implemented, they're often completely out of touch with making important decisions about the business. Oftentimes this is because they don't have the context, and they are simply told what to build. 

For Software Engineering we get a score of 12 or 13/15. Also not bad.

> ### How fun is Product Engineering? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How fun is product engineering? 
```

1. Challenging problems to solve - 5/5
    - You get the dopamine rush associated with coding, plus the UX problems to solve.
2. Support from other highly motivated colleagues - 5/5
    - Similar to software engineering, you often work on a team with other product engineers.
3. The ability to make _important_ decisions - 5/5
    - Because you're responsible for working with customers and data to decide what gets built, you're inherently making important decisions, similar to product management.

For Product Engineering we get a score of 15/15. Yes I made this scale up, and yes I've given Product Engineering a perfect score. But you did read the title of this blog post, didn't you? I'm _obviously_ biased.

## So what's the catch?

> Ah, there is a catch. There is no perfect score for fun without any downsides. There's a concept of a "fun hangover" in children where they have _such_ a fun day that you know the next day is going to be a complete terror. While slightly different in adults, I'm convinced this concept still applies.
> 
> The catch is this:
> 
> It's really hard to operate simultaneously in both a product and an engineering mindset. The former is an external mindset, and the latter is an internal mindset. Switching between the two takes effort and it's easy to get stuck in one or the other. You have to be very conscious about which mindset you are in - and which one is most useful to you and the company right now - and make that mindset work for the job that currently needs to be done. Sometimes you're in the wrong mindset, and the progress you need to make becomes slow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ah, there is a catch. There is no perfect score for fun without any downsides. One is the concept of a "fun hangover" in children – where they have _such_ a fun day that you know the next day is going to be a complete terror. While slightly different in adults, I'm convinced this concept still applies.

But here's the big one: 

It's **really hard** to operate in a product **and** an engineering mindset **simultaneously**. 

The former is an external mindset; the latter, an internal one. Switching takes effort, so you need to be conscious about which mindset you're in, and whether it's the right mindset for your active task. Progress becomes slow when you get stuck in the wrong one.
```

1. I've never heard of a "fun hangover" and it makes total sense. 🤯
2. Made some tweaks just to tighten the flow a bit, please check I didn't lose the meaning.
3. I added a semicolon because they rule.
